docs/02-propose-test-refine-loop.md, before:

# The Propose-Test-Refine Loop

This is the core innovation that makes Poetiq different from simple single-prompt approaches. Instead of asking an LLM once and hoping for the best, the system engages in an iterative problem-solving loop.

## The Core Insight

> "The prompt is an interface, not the intelligence."

Traditional approach:
```
User → Prompt → LLM → Answer (hope it's right)
```

Poetiq approach:
```
User → Prompt → LLM → Code → Test → Feedback → LLM → Better Code → ...
```

The LLM is just one component. The intelligence emerges from the **loop**.

## The Iteration Loop

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    START([Start Problem]) --> FORMAT[Format training examples]
    FORMAT --> PROMPT[Build prompt with<br/>solver instructions]

    PROMPT --> HAS_SOLUTIONS{Previous<br/>solutions exist?}
    HAS_SOLUTIONS -->|Yes| ADD_FEEDBACK[Add feedback from<br/>best past attempts]
    HAS_SOLUTIONS -->|No| CALL_LLM
    ADD_FEEDBACK --> CALL_LLM

    CALL_LLM[Call LLM<br/>Generate Python code] --> PARSE[Parse code from<br/>markdown response]

    PARSE --> EXECUTE[Execute code in<br/>sandbox]

    EXECUTE --> CHECK{All training<br/>examples pass?}

    CHECK -->|Yes| SUCCESS([Return Solution])
    CHECK -->|No| BUILD_FEEDBACK[Build detailed feedback<br/>showing what failed]

    BUILD_FEEDBACK --> STORE[Store solution with<br/>score and feedback]

    STORE --> MORE_ITERS{More iterations<br/>remaining?}
    MORE_ITERS -->|Yes| FORMAT
    MORE_ITERS -->|No| RETURN_BEST([Return Best Solution])
```

## Phase 1: PROPOSE

The LLM doesn't answer the puzzle directly. It generates **Python code** that implements a transformation function.

### Why Code Instead of Direct Answers?

| Approach | Problem |
|----------|---------|
| Direct answer | LLM must solve AND format output perfectly |
| Generate code | LLM reasons about the pattern, code handles formatting |

Code acts as a **verifiable hypothesis**. The LLM says "I think the pattern is X" and expresses it as code that can be tested.

### The Prompt Structure

```
<Problem>
Here are the training examples:

Example 1:
Input: [grid diagram]
Output: [grid diagram]

Example 2:
Input: [grid diagram]
Output: [grid diagram]
</Problem>

<Instructions>
Analyze the examples to find the transformation pattern.
Write a Python function: def transform(grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray
</Instructions>
```

The system uses ASCII diagrams (not raw JSON) because they're more readable for LLMs:
```
Input:
0 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 0

Output:
1 1 1
1 1 1
1 1 1
```

## Phase 2: TEST

Generated code runs in an isolated sandbox against **all training examples**.

### Why Sandbox Execution?

1. **Safety**: LLM-generated code might have bugs or be malicious
2. **Isolation**: Each test runs in a fresh environment
3. **Timeout**: Prevents infinite loops (1.5s limit)
4. **Reproducibility**: `PYTHONHASHSEED=0` ensures consistent behavior

### What Gets Tested

For each training example:
1. Run `transform(input_grid)` → predicted output
2. Compare predicted vs expected output
3. Record success/failure and accuracy

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    CODE[Generated<br/>Python Code] --> SANDBOX[Sandbox<br/>Subprocess]
    INPUT[Training<br/>Input Grid] --> SANDBOX
    SANDBOX --> OUTPUT[Predicted<br/>Output]
    EXPECTED[Expected<br/>Output] --> COMPARE{Match?}
    OUTPUT --> COMPARE
    COMPARE -->|Yes| PASS[Pass]
    COMPARE -->|No| FAIL[Fail + Score]
```

## Phase 3: REFINE

If the code doesn't pass all examples, the system builds **structured feedback** to guide the next iteration.

### Feedback Components

1. **Per-example status**: "Solves Example #1 correctly" or "incorrectly"
2. **Shape analysis**: If dimensions mismatch, explain expected vs actual
3. **Visual diff**: For same-shape failures, show grid with `prediction/expected` format
4. **Accuracy score**: 0.0 to 1.0 measuring pixel-level correctness

### Example Feedback

```
Your code's output does not match the expected output for Example 2.

Visualization with predictions shown as 'prediction/correct':
0/1  1/1  0/1
1/0  1/1  1/1
0/0  0/0  1/1

Output accuracy: 0.56 (0 is worst, 1 is best).
```

This tells the LLM:
- Row 1, Column 1: You predicted 0, should be 1
- Row 2, Column 1: You predicted 1, should be 0
- The solution is 56% correct

### Why This Beats Single Prompts

| Single Prompt | Iterative Refinement |
|---------------|----------------------|
| One chance to get it right | Multiple attempts with learning |
| No feedback on errors | Detailed feedback guides improvement |
| All-or-nothing | Partial progress tracked |
| Same result every time | Different seeds explore solution space |

## The Power of Iteration

### Iteration 1: Initial Hypothesis
LLM: "I think the pattern is to flip the grid horizontally"
→ Code fails on 2/3 examples

### Iteration 2: Refined Hypothesis
LLM (with feedback): "The flip was wrong. Looking at the failures, I see it's actually a 90-degree rotation"
→ Code passes all examples!

Without iteration, the system would have returned the wrong answer. With iteration, it **learns from mistakes**.

## Configuration Knobs

| Parameter | Default | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|---------|
| `max_iterations` | 10 | Maximum attempts per problem |
| `max_solutions` | 5 | How many past solutions to show |
| `selection_probability` | 1.0 | Probability of including each past solution |
| `improving_order` | true | Show solutions worst-to-best (negative examples) |
| `shuffle_examples` | true | Randomize training example order |

### Why Shuffle Examples?

Different orderings can lead to different insights:
- Order A: LLM notices color pattern first
- Order B: LLM notices spatial pattern first

By shuffling each iteration, the system explores different "angles" of understanding.

## Key Takeaway

The propose-test-refine loop transforms an LLM from a "one-shot oracle" into a **learning system**. Each iteration:

1. **PROPOSE**: Generate a hypothesis (as code)
2. **TEST**: Verify against known truth (training examples)
3. **REFINE**: Learn from failures (structured feedback)

This is why Poetiq achieves higher accuracy than the underlying LLMs alone—it wraps them in a feedback loop that converts partial knowledge into correct solutions.

## Next Steps

- [03-self-auditing-mechanism.md](./03-self-auditing-mechanism.md) - How the system knows when to stop
- [04-multi-expert-ensemble.md](./04-multi-expert-ensemble.md) - Running multiple experts in parallel

Commit message:

Document prompt and feedback wrappers

docs/02-propose-test-refine-loop.md, after:

# The Propose-Test-Refine Loop

This is the core innovation that makes Poetiq different from simple single-prompt approaches. Instead of asking an LLM once and hoping for the best, the system engages in an iterative problem-solving loop.

## The Core Insight

> "The prompt is an interface, not the intelligence."

Traditional approach:
```
User → Prompt → LLM → Answer (hope it's right)
```

Poetiq approach:
```
User → Prompt → LLM → Code → Test → Feedback → LLM → Better Code → ...
```

The LLM is just one component. The intelligence emerges from the **loop**.

## The Iteration Loop

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    START([Start Problem]) --> FORMAT[Format training examples]
    FORMAT --> PROMPT[Build prompt with<br/>solver instructions]

    PROMPT --> HAS_SOLUTIONS{Previous<br/>solutions exist?}
    HAS_SOLUTIONS -->|Yes| ADD_FEEDBACK[Add feedback from<br/>best past attempts]
    HAS_SOLUTIONS -->|No| CALL_LLM
    ADD_FEEDBACK --> CALL_LLM

    CALL_LLM[Call LLM<br/>Generate Python code] --> PARSE[Parse code from<br/>markdown response]

    PARSE --> EXECUTE[Execute code in<br/>sandbox]

    EXECUTE --> CHECK{All training<br/>examples pass?}

    CHECK -->|Yes| SUCCESS([Return Solution])
    CHECK -->|No| BUILD_FEEDBACK[Build detailed feedback<br/>showing what failed]

    BUILD_FEEDBACK --> STORE[Store solution with<br/>score and feedback]

    STORE --> MORE_ITERS{More iterations<br/>remaining?}
    MORE_ITERS -->|Yes| FORMAT
    MORE_ITERS -->|No| RETURN_BEST([Return Best Solution])
```

## Phase 1: PROPOSE

The LLM doesn't answer the puzzle directly. It generates **Python code** that implements a transformation function.

### Why Code Instead of Direct Answers?

| Approach | Problem |
|----------|---------|
| Direct answer | LLM must solve AND format output perfectly |
| Generate code | LLM reasons about the pattern, code handles formatting |

Code acts as a **verifiable hypothesis**. The LLM says "I think the pattern is X" and expresses it as code that can be tested.

### The Prompt Structure

A simplified view of the prompt sent to the LLM:

```
<Problem>
Here are the training examples:

Example 1:
Input: [grid diagram]
Output: [grid diagram]

...
</Problem>

<Instructions>
Analyze the examples to find the transformation pattern.
Write a Python function: def transform(grid: np.ndarray) -> np.ndarray
Available libraries: numpy, scipy, cv2 (OpenCV), and standard python libraries.
</Instructions>
```

The system uses ASCII diagrams (not raw JSON) because they're more readable for LLMs:
```
Input:
0 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 0

Output:
1 1 1
1 1 1
1 1 1
```

## Phase 2: TEST

Generated code runs in an isolated sandbox against **all training examples**.

### Why Sandbox Execution?

1. **Safety**: LLM-generated code might have bugs or be malicious
2. **Isolation**: Each test runs in a fresh environment
3. **Timeout**: Prevents infinite loops (1.5s limit)
4. **Reproducibility**: `PYTHONHASHSEED=0` ensures consistent behavior

### What Gets Tested

For each training example:
1. Run `transform(input_grid)` → predicted output
2. Compare predicted vs expected output
3. Record success/failure and accuracy

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    CODE[Generated<br/>Python Code] --> SANDBOX[Sandbox<br/>Subprocess]
    INPUT[Training<br/>Input Grid] --> SANDBOX
    SANDBOX --> OUTPUT[Predicted<br/>Output]
    EXPECTED[Expected<br/>Output] --> COMPARE{Match?}
    OUTPUT --> COMPARE
    COMPARE -->|Yes| PASS[Pass]
    COMPARE -->|No| FAIL[Fail + Score]
```

## Phase 3: REFINE

If the code doesn't pass all examples, the system builds **structured feedback** to guide the next iteration.

### Feedback Components

1. **Per-example status**: "Solves Example #1 correctly" or "incorrectly"
2. **Shape analysis**: If dimensions mismatch, explain expected vs actual
3. **Visual diff**: For same-shape failures, show grid with `prediction/expected` format
4. **Accuracy score**: 0.0 to 1.0 measuring pixel-level correctness

### The Feedback Wrapper

The feedback is not just appended raw; it is wrapped in a prompt that instructs the LLM to learn from these mistakes:

```
**EXISTING PARTIAL/INCORRECT SOLUTIONS:**

Following are some of the best, though not completely correct, solutions so far. 
For each solution, its code, corresponding feedback regarding its output... 
Study these solutions and corresponding feedback and produce a new solution fixing all the issues.

<solution_1>
...
</solution_1>
```

### Example Feedback

```
Your code's output does not match the expected output for Example 2.

Visualization with predictions shown as 'prediction/correct':
0/1  1/1  0/1
1/0  1/1  1/1
0/0  0/0  1/1

Output accuracy: 0.56 (0 is worst, 1 is best).
```

This tells the LLM:
- Row 1, Column 1: You predicted 0, should be 1
- Row 2, Column 1: You predicted 1, should be 0
- The solution is 56% correct

### Why This Beats Single Prompts

| Single Prompt | Iterative Refinement |
|---------------|----------------------|
| One chance to get it right | Multiple attempts with learning |
| No feedback on errors | Detailed feedback guides improvement |
| All-or-nothing | Partial progress tracked |
| Same result every time | Different seeds explore solution space |

## The Power of Iteration

### Iteration 1: Initial Hypothesis
LLM: "I think the pattern is to flip the grid horizontally"
→ Code fails on 2/3 examples

### Iteration 2: Refined Hypothesis
LLM (with feedback): "The flip was wrong. Looking at the failures, I see it's actually a 90-degree rotation"
→ Code passes all examples!

Without iteration, the system would have returned the wrong answer. With iteration, it **learns from mistakes**.

## Configuration Knobs

| Parameter | Default | Purpose |
|-----------|---------|---------|
| `max_iterations` | 10 | Maximum attempts per problem |
| `max_solutions` | 5 | How many past solutions to show |
| `selection_probability` | 1.0 | Probability of including each past solution |
| `improving_order` | true | Show solutions worst-to-best (negative examples) |
| `shuffle_examples` | true | Randomize training example order |

### Why Shuffle Examples?

Different orderings can lead to different insights:
- Order A: LLM notices color pattern first
- Order B: LLM notices spatial pattern first

By shuffling each iteration, the system explores different "angles" of understanding.

## Key Takeaway

The propose-test-refine loop transforms an LLM from a "one-shot oracle" into a **learning system**. Each iteration:

1. **PROPOSE**: Generate a hypothesis (as code)
2. **TEST**: Verify against known truth (training examples)
3. **REFINE**: Learn from failures (structured feedback)

This is why Poetiq achieves higher accuracy than the underlying LLMs alone—it wraps them in a feedback loop that converts partial knowledge into correct solutions.

## Next Steps

- [03-self-auditing-mechanism.md](./03-self-auditing-mechanism.md) - How the system knows when to stop
- [04-multi-expert-ensemble.md](./04-multi-expert-ensemble.md) - Running multiple experts in parallel
